readme.md, before:

---
title: FA-TOOLS(1) fa-tools
date: 2023-05
---


# NAME

fa-tools - a CLI toolbox to retrieve content from FurAffinity


# NOTES

The program is intended for personal use.
Mass scrapping requires an explicit authorisation from the staff of the
website.

FurAffinity does not expose a public API, so the program relies on scrapping
content from some user browsing session.

The scrapping program assumes that the session uses the "Modern" theme on the
website.


# ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

`FA_SESSION_HEADERS`
:   Session headers extracted from an existing authenticated browser session.
    Given as a dictionary of key and values separated by `: `, one per line.
    Required.

    Those request headers can be copied from a web browser by opening the
    "developer tools", going to the "network" tab, then the "request" sub-tab.


# COMMANDS

`fa-tools list [OPTIONS] LIST_PAGE_URL`
:   Retrieve and list submissions from a gallery as CSV.

    Columns are: page, thumbnail, kind, rating, title.

    `-a` `--all-folders`
    :   List items from all folders (default: false)

`fa-tools info SUBMISSION_PAGE_URL`
:   Retrieve and print a submission's info as JSON.

    Fields are: page, download, author, date, tags, folders(name, url), title,
    description.

`fa-tools download [OPTIONS] SUBMISSION_URL`
:   Download a submission file from the given page or direct link.
    Prints the name of the output file once downloaded.

    `-o` `--output=FILE`
    :   Output file (default: original name)


# EXAMPLE

The following snippet lists all the submissions in a gallery folder, download
all the writings and convert them to EPUB e-book to be read offline on an e-ink
tablet for example.

Fish shell commands:

```fish
# Get into a shell with the fa-tools, q, jq and ebook-convert programs
nix shell github:Notkea/fa-tools 'nixpkgs#'{q-text-as-data,jq,calibre}

# Use an existing FA user session, to extract from a web browser
set --export FA_SESSION_HEADERS "
User-Agent: [...]
Cookie: [...]
[...]
"

# Retrieve the list of submissions in a gallery folder,
# and filter it to keep the page URLs of only the text submissions
set text_submission_pages (
  fa-tools list https://www.furaffinity.net/gallery/$SOMEUSER/ |
    q -d, -H "select distinct(page) from - where kind = 't-text'"
)

# For each text submission...
for submission_page in $text_submission_pages
  # Retrieve submission metadata as a JSON string
  set meta (fa-tools info $submission_page)

  # Download the submission file
  set filename (fa-tools download $submission_page)

  # Convert to an EPUB e-book, using the metadata from the JSON info
  ebook-convert $filename $filename.epub \
    --authors (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.author') \
    --pubdate (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.date') \
    --title (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.title') \
    --tags (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.tags | join(",")') \
    --no-default-epub-cover
end
```


# DEVELOPMENT

The source code is available at <https://github.com/Notkea/fa-tools>.

To start a development environment:

```fish
# Enter the nix development shell with all the tools made available
nix develop

# Generate the cabal project file from the hpack package.yaml
hpack

# Build using Cabal
cabal build

# The library documentation can be accessed and searched through Hoogle
hoogle serve --local

# An editor using the LSP haskell-language-server should recognised everything
```

# KNOWN ISSUES

The following issues affecting the program are known. Patches welcome.

* Readme on github: the second paragraphs in definition lists are showing as
  code blocs on github. Should find a way to make both github and pandoc happy
  at the same time to have a proper web readme and a `man`page.

* Useless devel doc in Flake: `nix run github:Notkea/fa-tools` downloads the
  __developer__ documentation of the Haskell dependencies, for no good reason.

* Orphan instances for URI: the code should define its own wrapper type and
  define the instances on it, instead of relying on orphan instances on lib
  types.


# LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2021-2023 Notkea.

_fa-tools_ is distributed under the terms of European Union Public Licence
version 1.2, a copy of which is provided in `licence.txt`.

Commit message:

readme: add known issue with square brackets in dl urls

readme.md, after:

---
title: FA-TOOLS(1) fa-tools
date: 2023-05
---


# NAME

fa-tools - a CLI toolbox to retrieve content from FurAffinity


# NOTES

The program is intended for personal use.
Mass scrapping requires an explicit authorisation from the staff of the
website.

FurAffinity does not expose a public API, so the program relies on scrapping
content from some user browsing session.

The scrapping program assumes that the session uses the "Modern" theme on the
website.


# ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

`FA_SESSION_HEADERS`
:   Session headers extracted from an existing authenticated browser session.
    Given as a dictionary of key and values separated by `: `, one per line.
    Required.

    Those request headers can be copied from a web browser by opening the
    "developer tools", going to the "network" tab, then the "request" sub-tab.


# COMMANDS

`fa-tools list [OPTIONS] LIST_PAGE_URL`
:   Retrieve and list submissions from a gallery as CSV.

    Columns are: page, thumbnail, kind, rating, title.

    `-a` `--all-folders`
    :   List items from all folders (default: false)

`fa-tools info SUBMISSION_PAGE_URL`
:   Retrieve and print a submission's info as JSON.

    Fields are: page, download, author, date, tags, folders(name, url), title,
    description.

`fa-tools download [OPTIONS] SUBMISSION_URL`
:   Download a submission file from the given page or direct link.
    Prints the name of the output file once downloaded.

    `-o` `--output=FILE`
    :   Output file (default: original name)


# EXAMPLE

The following snippet lists all the submissions in a gallery folder, download
all the writings and convert them to EPUB e-book to be read offline on an e-ink
tablet for example.

Fish shell commands:

```fish
# Get into a shell with the fa-tools, q, jq and ebook-convert programs
nix shell github:Notkea/fa-tools 'nixpkgs#'{q-text-as-data,jq,calibre}

# Use an existing FA user session, to extract from a web browser
set --export FA_SESSION_HEADERS "
User-Agent: [...]
Cookie: [...]
[...]
"

# Retrieve the list of submissions in a gallery folder,
# and filter it to keep the page URLs of only the text submissions
set text_submission_pages (
  fa-tools list https://www.furaffinity.net/gallery/$SOMEUSER/ |
    q -d, -H "select distinct(page) from - where kind = 't-text'"
)

# For each text submission...
for submission_page in $text_submission_pages
  # Retrieve submission metadata as a JSON string
  set meta (fa-tools info $submission_page)

  # Download the submission file
  set filename (fa-tools download $submission_page)

  # Convert to an EPUB e-book, using the metadata from the JSON info
  ebook-convert $filename $filename.epub \
    --authors (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.author') \
    --pubdate (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.date') \
    --title (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.title') \
    --tags (echo "$meta" | jq -r '.tags | join(",")') \
    --no-default-epub-cover
end
```


# DEVELOPMENT

The source code is available at <https://github.com/Notkea/fa-tools>.

To start a development environment:

```fish
# Enter the nix development shell with all the tools made available
nix develop

# Generate the cabal project file from the hpack package.yaml
hpack

# Build using Cabal
cabal build

# The library documentation can be accessed and searched through Hoogle
hoogle serve --local

# An editor using the LSP haskell-language-server should recognised everything
```

# KNOWN ISSUES

The following issues affecting the program are known. Patches welcome.

* Special characters in URLs: the `download` and `info` sub-command crashes
  with "Non-exhaustive patterns in Just uri" or similar errors in the presence
  of unescaped symbols in URLs. FA seems not to escape those in file download
  URLs, which may contain characters such as square brackets.

* Readme on github: the second paragraphs in definition lists are showing as
  code blocs on github. Should find a way to make both github and pandoc happy
  at the same time to have a proper web readme and a `man`page.

* Useless devel doc in Flake: `nix run github:Notkea/fa-tools` downloads the
  __developer__ documentation of the Haskell dependencies, for no good reason.

* Orphan instances for URI: the code should define its own wrapper type and
  define the instances on it, instead of relying on orphan instances on lib
  types.


# LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2021-2023 Notkea.

_fa-tools_ is distributed under the terms of European Union Public Licence
version 1.2, a copy of which is provided in `licence.txt`.
